Example 6.2: Good to the last drop The volunteer fire department was called out to a three-story apartment complex. When they arrived, they saw heavy smoke and some flames coming out of one of the basement units. The commander, who had a lot of firefighting experience, sent some of his crew into the building in order to locate the seat of the fire. He sent another crew to ventilate the roof—cut a hole in it to allow the smoke and heat to escape. He also ordered one of his engine crews to attach their hoses to a nearby fire hydrant. Then he got the word—the hydrant was dry. There must have been a problem with the water supply pipes in the village. However, he had no time or need to speculate. He had to extinguish the fire, which was growing in intensity, even though he hadn’t determined where the seat of the fire was and the only water he had was the little that he brought with him on the fire trucks. The apartments had been constructed with a common attic, making it likely that the fire would destroy the entire unit if he didn’t quickly get it under control. Without hesitation he ordered his crew to aim all of their water at the point that he judged to be the seat of the fire. All of the water. If he guessed wrong he would just have to watch the fire destroy the entire building. His guess was right. The water he had was enough to extinguish the blaze, barely. Afterward, he explained to my research team that fires grow exponentially. By the time he was certain of the location of the seat of the fire, the fire would have been too large to contain. He had to rely on a blitz attack to catch it while it was small. He had to rely on his judgment. My colleagues have used this scenario to test commanders in other fire departments. Experienced ones make the same decision—hit the fire with everything they’ve got. The newly promoted commanders hesitate. They aren’t confident in their judgment and they fear the consequences of using up all the water. They tend to keep some water in reserve even though that decision will make it less likely that they’ll put the fire out, and the amount in reserve won’t be useful. Experienced commanders have learned to rely on their first judgment because they usually don’t get a second chance. The answer to the second mystery, how to evaluate an option if you don’t compare it to others, is that the commanders evaluated an option by imagining it. **They played it through in their mind, conducting a mental simulation. If it worked, they carried it out. If it almost worked, they altered it to make it better. If they couldn’t make it work, they discarded it and looked at the next most typical action, continuing on until they found an adequate course of action.** Klein, Calderwood, and Clinton-Cirocco (1986) called this strategy a Recognition-Primed Decision (RPD) model. (See figure 6.1.) The pattern recognition suggested an effective course of action and then the firefighters used a mental simulation to make sure it would work. This RPD strategy combines intuition with analysis. The pattern matching is the intuitive part, and the mental simulation is the deliberate analysis.

Therefore, I would replace claim 3 (To make a decision, generate several options and compare them to pick the best one) with the RPD model: Good decision makers use their experience to recognize an effective option and evaluate it through mental simulation. Our research shows that the more experience people have, the more likely they are to make decisions without deliberately contrasting options. The action scripts are hunches for how to decide. The scripts get developed further during the mental simulation of how they might play out. Novices, lacking the experience base to recognize patterns, must generate a range of options in the hope that one of them might work. The first study of firefighters showed that about 80 percent of the difficult decisions followed the RPD model. Later research with a wider range of settings has upped the estimate to around 90 percent. Other researchers, using offshore oil installation crisis managers and Navy technicians,10 have replicated our findings.11 The incident in which a US Airways pilot safely landed in the Hudson River illustrates recognition-primed decision making. Example 6.3: Miracle on the Hudson On January 15, 2009, at 3:25 p.m., US Airways Flight 1529, an Airbus 320, took off from LaGuardia Airport in New York on its way to Charlotte, North Carolina. Two minutes after the takeoff the airplane hit a flock of Canada geese and lost thrust in both of its engines. The captain, Chesley B. “Sully” Sullen-berger III, and the first officer, Jeffrey Skiles, safely landed the airplane in the Hudson River at 3:31 p.m. All 150 passengers plus the five crew members were rescued. Media reports and interviews with Sullenberger allow us to describe his decision strategy after he lost thrust in both engines. Option 1 was to return to LaGuardia Airport. Sullenberger’s initial message to the air traffic controllers was “Hit birds. We lost thrust in both engines. We’re turning back toward LaGuardia.” But he quickly realized that the airplane was too low and slow to make it back, so he abandoned that plan. Option 2 was to find another airport. Sullenberger was headed west and thought he might be able to reach Teterboro Airport in New Jersey. The air traffic controllers quickly gained permission for him to land at Teterboro, but Sullenberger judged he wouldn’t get that far. “We can’t do it,” he stated. “We’re gonna be in the Hudson.” Option 3 was to land in the Hudson River. Sullenberger’s decision strategy fits the RPD model. He considered three courses of action, one at a time, starting with the most typical and ending with the most desperate. It is instructive to think about what he didn’t do. He didn’t set up the kind of decision matrix shown in table 6.1, listing these three options and contrasting them on common evaluation dimensions such as shortest distance, best runways, least inconvenience to passengers who might need to re-book their flights. Sullenberger was satisficing, looking for the first option that would work. Before the firefighter studies that we conducted, researchers didn’t know how people actually made decisions. The formal decision models described a set of ideal strategies. While many decision researchers understood that people didn’t use those strategies, it wasn’t obvious what people did instead. They may have carried out a simplified and corrupted form of the strategies, or they may have made arbitrary choices. Most of the experiments used college students performing artificial tasks, and didn’t involve any experience. Researchers hadn’t considered the possibility that when people used their experience the first option they considered could be a good one. How good are these first options? Maybe the first options satisfied the decision makers’ needs but were pretty mediocre. To examine this question we designed a study using skilled chess players. We showed them challenging game positions and asked them to think aloud as they studied the boards. We really just wanted to identify the first move option they thought of. We evaluated these first impulses using grandmaster ratings. The grandmasters assessed that only one-sixth of the legal moves were worth considering. Therefore, if the players were just randomly coming up with possible moves, only one-sixth of their first moves would have gotten acceptable ratings from the grandmasters. We found that the players were much, much better than chance. Two-thirds of their moves received acceptable ratings from the grandmasters, versus the one-sixth we would expect by chance. The chess players in our study, even the mediocre ones, weren’t randomly spinning out options. Most of their first choices met the standards of grandmasters.12 The RPD model shows how we can make good decisions—using our experience—without comparing options and without even generating more than one option. The decision-analysis model, as stated in claim 3, shouldn’t be our gold standard for good decision making, because we rarely use this strategy and because it doesn’t seem to result in better decisions. Now that we have covered what is wrong with claim 3, and how people actually make decisions, let’s re-examine the connection between analysis and intuition.

## Comparing options: 
Sometimes we do face situations in which we do have to contrast different courses of action. We may have a choice between a few different job applicants, or between a few different jobs, or different colleges that have accepted us, or we may have to figure out which computer to buy. We may have to decide whether to move to another state to be with a spouse. What do we do then? We can learn from skilled chess players.17 They don’t settle for the first satisfactory option. They really do want to play the best move possible. Their strategy is to conduct mental simulations of each one of the promising moves, imagining how the option would play out deeper and deeper into the future. Then they take stock of their mental and emotional reactions to what they see in this mental review. If they feel that a line of play is going to get them into trouble, they reject that move. Other moves may have potential and are worth thinking about, and some just feel right—they just seem to be more promising than the others. Thus, the players are considering several moves, but their choice is based on how each move stands up to the mental simulation, not on a comparison of moves using standard criteria.