[[202107160345 Visuelle Inspiration Demons and Cultists _ Gardens of Hecate Strange Gods]]
[[202203241317 Fantasy Religion]]
[[202008020857 Lesser Key to the Celestial Legion]]
[[201908191740 Silent Legions]]
[[202007271107 Sternenkarte sternenkirche]]

 

How Unified is the Cult?  
1. Obedient to leaders who sometimes quarrel 
2. Badly fractious under many rival priests
3. Completely united behind its leadership
4. Tenuously balanced factions cooperate

 

What General Goal Do They Have? 
1. Expand the cult in an adjacent community
2. Extinguish a rival faith and their clergy  
3. Obtain secular control over an area
4. Glorify their dark god and its vile ways
5. Destroy a powerful enemy of the cult
6. Perform a terrible magical ritual

 

What’s So Horrible About the Faith?  
1. Hideous appetites of the flesh are sacred  
2. Unbelievers are cattle to be used as desired 
3. Secular civilization must be destroyed  
4. The god demands a terrible nourishment
5. Unbelievers are to be killed on principle
6. Unholy entities from beyond must be called
7. The world must die to make room for the god
8. All law but the cult’s must be overthrown

 

How Do the Clergy Enforce Their Will?
1. Blackmail and threats of social ruin  
2. Mental compulsions implanted by rituals 
3. Traitors are betrayed to cult enemies
4. The dark god’s divine wrath smites them  
5. Lay believers gain glory by purging traitors
6. Magical curses scourge the disobedient
7. Murder by cult enforcers and monsters
8. Kidnapping before a hideous ritual death
9. Violence against a traitor’s loved ones
10. Control of an addictive thing they need

 

What Problems Does It Have?  
1. It caught the eye of a dangerous enemy  
2. It’s running low on sacrifices and slaves  
3. There’s a dangerous schism in its ranks  
4. The laity is demanding much from the priests
5. The god’s influence has become distant 
6. Another dark faith is warring with it
7. The leadership is insane in unhelpful ways
8. One of its servitor monsters is out of control
9. It’s been impoverished by a recent trouble
10. Its god is making unreasonable demands
11. The enforcers are muscling their clerical lords
12. An important member has turned traitor

 

Specific Traits of the Cult  
1. It’s a remnant of a now-dead culture  
2. It’s a sect of a better-known public faith  
3. It has a totemic beast or monster type  
4. They’re cannibals or other gustatory deviants
5. They were thought to be wiped out in the past 
6. It employs technology-like magics  
7. An area is tacitly understood to belong to it
8. It has open sympathizers among the great
9. They only look like humans
10. They serve a purpose that no longer obtains
11. It favors monstrous body alterations
12. It has a variety of potent ancient artifacts
13. It cuts secret deals with the ruling class
14. They live where normal people couldn’t
15. They have agents in other religious groups
16. A subculture of the land is friendly to it
17. It has a lot of servitor monsters obedient to it
18. It was once a public and powerful faith
19. It’s thought to hold back some awful doom
20. The visible part of the cult is but a fraction of it

