[[Ready NPCs]]
[[202201101101 NPC MOC]]
[[gig-economy-desktop.pdf]]

                                 GIG ECONOMY


                           Published by Hurtleberry
                       Text copyright Colin Sproule 2022
                    Copy editing thanks to Peter Hemminger
              Cover and interior illustrations Amanda Ho 2022
            Text on pages 1,2,3,4,5 is licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0

                     More info at https://hurtleberry.net


                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

               INTRODUCTION                                  I
               LACKEYS                                       1
               TOWNSFOLK, COMMON                             2
               TOWNSFOLK, UNCOMMON                           4
               FIGHTERS                                      6
               THIEVES                                       8
               CLERICS	                                    10
               MAGIC-USERS                                  12
               HALFLINGS                                    14
               DWARVES                                      16
               ELVES                                        18
               HIRING POOL PROCEDURE                        20
               QUICK HIRING & LOCATION HIRING PROCEDURES    21
          



                                   {PAGE I}

                                 INTRODUCTION
                              

NPCs hired to accompany players on their adventures go by many names, including 
hirelings, flunkeys, henchmen, meat shields, hired hands and toadys. In this 
zine we will refer to them as retainers for simplicity.

Soliciting help is a cornerstone of old-school play, and the following pages 
contain 200 retainers ready to seek employment in your game world.

Gig Economy has been organised to facilitate efficient hiring procedures.
Try out the examples on page 20, or create your own.

- Each spread contains a single retainer type/class

- Retainers are ordered within the spread by competency. #1 is a deadbeat loser,
  #20 is qualified and reasonably equipped.

- Regular humans have been placed at the beginning of the zine. Magic-wielding 
  humans in the middle and Demihumans at the end.


                                   {PAGE 1}

                                   LACKEYS


These peasants rarely fight, but make excellent porters, torchbearers, door 
openers, and animal tenders. Level 0. 

01. Fekla Cheeseweed
    What an absolute mess. Likely hungover. Will try to sneak a few naps.

02. Rauf Broster
    An uncomfortable, clumsy, ungainly, blundering ham-handed butterfingers.

03. Gary Ditchpig
    Generally off-putting. You probably found them passed out in the gutter.

04. Brindle Milda
    Snot-drenched. Coughs non-stop. Ears so clogged they can barely hear.

05. Herbert Louise
    Fired from every job they’ve ever had. Usually on the first day.

06. Doozer
    “I’m 9 years old, my family was eaten by wolves and I like the colour
    green!”

07. Guy Freeday
    Audible sighs are their speciality. “Are we still looking for treasure?”

08. Cleder Lacroy
    Never prepared. “Can I have a sip of your water? Got an extra bedroll?”

09. Finlay Uptop
    Energetic little bugger. Won’t shut up. Will answer rhetorical questions.

10. Wenn Cotter
    “Did I not mention I was cursed? My bad!”

11. Becca Bluetongue
    Mute and illiterate. Happy to join you. Expect lots of pointing and 
    hand-waving.

12. Mani Grell
    Will try to be friends with everyone. The more you resist, the harder they 
    try.

13. Tegan Kraftensew
    Homemade clothing that walks a fine line between artistic and offensive.

14. Zabul
    Undeserved confidence. “Nothing is impossible for the great Zabul!”

15. Bean
    Confused about the nature of the work agreed upon. “What’s with the swords?"

16. Gopaa
    By and large unphased by requests no matter how outrageous. “It’s a livin’.”

17. Craig
    Fully content to do anything you ask of them regardless of the danger.

18. Maurice Kitchener
    Makes a mean stew and a fine pie. Always volunteers to cook for the party.

19. Pickles
    Well-spoken child. Calls party members “teacher” from time to time.

20. Kali
    Confident. Brave. Scrawny.  Wants to be an adventurer!




                                   {PAGE 2}

                               TOWNSFOLK COMMON                          


Not experienced, but willing to take some risk. Easy to find anywhere people hav
e settled. Level 0. 

01. Just Ian
    “Why yes I am Ian! Oh… No, not that Ian. Yes, I’m sure. Sorry to
    disappoint.”
    - Clothing, boring
    - Unarmed
    - Bowl of oatmeal + spoon

02. Sevi Capper
    Hat maker. Not all there but can follow simple instructions.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Unarmed
    - Fabric scissors

03. Loren Ipson
    Speaks in a weird language no one understands. Total dummy.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Book of unreadable text

04. Ernuf Malva
    Local builder. A few bricks shy of a load. Calloused hands and feet.
    Shoeless.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Well-worn trowel

05. Daw Brewster
    If you had a particularly revolting ale recently it was probably brewed by 
    Daw.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Pound of rolled oats

06. Leon
    Can be heard muttering “I used to be an actor” during arduous tasks.
    - Clothing, stage costume
    - Unarmed
    - 3 different wigs

07. William Penrose
    Bird watching fanatic. Doesn’t know their names but will point them out.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Shoddy spyglass

08. May O’Gara
    Soup and stew enthusiast. Saving up to open “May’s Souper Bowl”.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Enough soup for all

09. Hafren Grove
    Agrees to join you as long as they don’t have to hurt any animals.
    - Clothing, natural
    - Unarmed
    - 25’ leather cord

10. Irmel Sauter
    Local gossip. Always putting their nose in other people’s business. Chatty.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Unarmed
    - Perfume


                                   {PAGE 3}


11. Brice Niblett 
    Total suck-up. “Boy golly I never seen adventurers so brave as you!”
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Dagger
    - Bundle of torches

12. Sandy Honeyman
    Local beekeeper struggling to keep their business afloat. Sharp wit.
    - Clothing, apiarist hood
    - Club
    - Pot of honey

13. Gwennol Ratter
    Everyone in the area knows to call on Gwennol when you have a rat problem.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Hammer (bloody)
    - Satchel of smashed rats 

14. Angwen Koivista
    Angsty teenager looking for work to escape their “super lame” parents.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Sling
    - Lantern

15. Callum Rivers
    Artisanal candle maker and big time dreamer. Overly confident in others.
    - Clothing, leather apron
    - Dagger
    - 3 scented candles

16. Lauretta Bester
    Lost their entire herd in a bet. Working to buy each animal back one by one.
    - Clothing, farming garb
    - Staff
    - Stockwhip

17. Maren Henty
    A busybody who sees adventure as just another opportunity to tinker.
    - Clothing, work clothes
    - Javelin
    - Bag of tools

18. Stormin' Norman
    Jolly, loud, and loves to laugh. Personal space is a foreign concept.
    - Clothing, simple + shield
    - Hand axe
    - So much garlic

19. Kensa Pond
    Local stable person and messenger in training. Favours all with horses.
    - Clothing, riding gear
    - Shortbow
    - Grooming tools

20. Ian the Admired
    Their name precedes them. Sought after. “Never fear, Ian is here!”
    - Armour, leather
    - Short sword
    - 50’ rope + grappling hook




                                   {PAGE 4}

                             TOWNSFOLK, UNCOMMON


While not trained, they possess adventuring-adjacent experience and are willing 
to take higher risks. Level 0.

01. Hutch Eggmen
    Very dirty. Smells of cabbage. Badly wants to join your party full-time.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Unarmed
    - Sack of potatoes

02. Tad Malpass
    Lazy S.O.B. Requires creative motivational techniques.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Cup-and-ball toy

03. Romana Mayberry
    Herb-peddler and fortune teller. Good at neither. Not good at much actually.
    - Clothing, linen tunic
    - Unarmed
    - Weird crystal rivière

04. Nerth Burler
    Knows a lot about textiles. Doesn’t know a thing about fighting or
    exploring.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Unarmed
    - 50’ of yarn

05. Ada Thornley
    Recently de-programmed member of local cult. Mind wanders often.
    - Clothing, mouldy robes
    - Unarmed
    - Jar of leeches

06. Pawly Woolman
    That hat… What an incredible hat! Best hat you’ve ever seen.
    - Clothing, fine (and hat!)
    - Dagger
    - Fancy walking stick

07. Tudwal the Thick
    Unwashed, snaggletoothed, foul-mouthed, belligerent oaf.  
    - Clothing, burlap tunic
    - Club
    - Flagon of horrible wine

08. Richard the Peeler
    What's up with their skin? It’s not contagious but it sure ain’t pretty.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Dagger
    - Bottle of lotion

09. Padarn Hullet
    Overly accommodating and annoying. "I can’t afford to lose this job!”
    - Clothing, simple
    - Staff
    - Key to the local tavern

10. Sally Dougan
    Talks a big game about their adventures but has literally never left town.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Sling
    - Tin whistle (off-key)


                                   {PAGE 5}


11. Davy Mustard
    Saving up money to travel home to the family farm for good this time.
    - Clothing, farming garb
    - Javelin
    - Old horseshoe

12. Chort Wilding
    Willing to do pretty much anything. No one knows how they’re still alive.
    - Clothing, shredded rags
    - Staff
    - Lucky coin

13. Jayaa Orgill
    Why are they already covered in blood? Where are their shoes?
    - Clothing, simple (bloody)
    - Club
    - Rusted steel mirror

14. Derwa Cripps
    Pretty sure you’ve never seen thicker curls on a head in your life.
    - Clothing, farming garb
    - Sling
    - Jar of pickled carrots

15. Eleri Swift
    Light on their feet, even lighter on cash. May or may not be wanted by 
    officials.
    - Clothing, fine
    - Silver dagger
    - Big, bushy fake beard

16. Zer Oyono
    Tired look on their face. Blistered hands. Boot soles worn through.
    - Clothing, military uniform
    - Damaged short sword
    - Horn trumpet

17. Glen Farrow
    Respected by locals for their work ethic. Has a ridiculous farmer’s tan.
    - Clothing, buckskin jacket
    - Warhammer
    - Blacksmith gloves

18. Blodwen Moggs 
    Speaks in a whisper. Gruesome scar runs the length of their neck.
    - Clothing, hunting garb
    - Short sword
    - Whetstone

19. Alan Gribel
    Just trying to provide for their family. Doesn’t want any trouble.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Spear
    - 50' nice rope

20. Okara Camara
    Speedy. Will rush anything if given the chance. “Time is money!”
    - Armour, leather
    - Shortbow
    - Crowbar




                                   {PAGE 6}

                                   FIGHTERS

01. Anzor the Weird
    Everyone is uncomfortable around Anzor. Why did you hire them?
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Mouth harp

02. Eiron of the Swamp
    Looks, smells, and acts like they reside alone in a swamp (they do).
    - Clothing, simple (grungy)
    - Unarmed
    - Gaiters for boots

03. Vaas the Haunted
    Always looking over their shoulder. Appears exhausted. Scares easily.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Hooded lantern

04. Medlan of North
    A wisecracking trickster. Takes jobs to fund a gambling addiction.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Unarmed
    - Set of loaded dice

05. Zivon Cowper
    Hates being told what to do. Will probably forget you actually hired them.
    - Clothing, fine
    - Unarmed
    - War horn (loud)

06. Serlo Drybeard
    Salt-stained from head to toe. Walks like a drunk on land. Steady on the 
    water.
    - Clothing, sailing garb
    - Rusted dagger
    - Compass

07. Makata the Callow
    Youthful and genuinely excited to join your party on an adventure.
    - Clothing, small cape
    - Sling
    - Book of natural remedies

08. Cryda Frogley
    Bit of a runt but hard working, determined and never complains.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Club
    - Sewing kit

09. Thaddeus Burlington
    Possess great strength and perfect physique. Will gladly destroy an enemy.
    - Essential coverings only
    - Javelin
    - Sack of various meats

10. Hamo the Fist
    Heavyweight champion of somewhere you’ve never heard of.
    - Clothing, shorts
    - Fists (damage as club)
    - Bag of powdered chalk


                                   {PAGE 7}


11. Bertolf of Dashwood
    Jolly and bright. Speaks in a thick accent. Has awesome boots.
    - Armour, leather
    - Spear
    - Crampons

12. Kumari Yogesh
    Believes the world could be a better place. Would give the shirt off their 
    back.
    - Armour, leather
    - Crossbow
    - Two-person tent

13. Rakesh the Fair
    Not so fair, better that they’re on your side. Watch your stuff.
    - Armour, leather
    - Hand axe
    - Hidden blade in boot toe

14. Corso the Lovely
    All smiles but not a single tooth. A class act and great companion
    regardless.
    - Armour, leather
    - Short sword
    - Bar of soap

15. Belda Goldfosse
    Long, luscious, flowing hair. Strategic and unmoving in battle. 
    - Armour, leather
    - Mace
    - Small batch hair oil

16. Hug Sorolla
    Recently kicked out of the military. “You say Jump. I say how high?”
    - Armour, leather + shield
    - Spear
    - Bota bag (holy water)

17. Tambo the Steady
    Nerves of steel and cheery disposition. “Don'y worry, we got this, boss!”
    - Armour, leather
    - Sword
    - Expedition backpack

18. Yatun Batterhorn
    Elderly but chipper. Refers to everyone as “whippersnapper” or “kid”.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Longbow
    - Ornate tobacco pipe

19. Barbara Hackenchop
    Proudly wears a necklace of bones. Their axe is always sharp and polished.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Battle axe
    - Gaudy oversized stein

20. Wolfhart the Third
    “I will avenge my family and I will take back the land that is rightfully
    mine.”
    - Armour, plate mail
    - Two-handed sword
    - Iron wolf mask




                                   {PAGE 8}

                                   THIEVES

01. Jory Moppets
    The most heavy-footed accident-prone thief this side of the river.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Unarmed
    - Sweaty cheese

02. Abbie O’Boyle
    Clearly escaped from imprisonment recently. Smells of sweat and mud.
    - Clothing, prison garb
    - Unarmed
    - Metal file

03. Hannah Bandana
    Uses a ragged bandana in attempts to hide how young they are.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Unarmed
    - Wooden toy top

04. Nimi the Nervous
    Insists on complete silence and no interruptions whenever using their
    skills.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Pillow

05. Biko Mantilla
    Not motivated to earn their keep. Your party won’t lack sarcasm with Biko
    around.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Unarmed
    - Handkerchief

06. Garbanza the Great
    Working on some illusions to distract their targets. Lacks stage presence.
    - Clothing, velvet cape
    - Dagger
    - Book on sleight-of-hand

07. Ricco Dabbs
    Sporting some wicked mutton chops and one makeshift wooden eye.
    - Clothing, festive
    - Club
    - Jazzy walking cane

08. Feliks the Searcher
    The kind of enthusiastic looter that leaves no stone or pocket unturned.
    - Clothing, misc. stolen
    - Staff
    - Hooded mask

09. Candra Adept
    A mountaineer at heart, with a knack for thieving. Willing to climb
    anything.
    - Clothing, climbing garb
    - Sling
    - Ice axe


                                   {PAGE 9}


10. Ducky Greenleaf
    Captivating, with loads of stories. May not be who they say they are.
    - Clothing, fine
    - Dagger
    - Forgery tools

11. Murdo
    Sincerely believes they can stab their way out of any situation. Collects 
    knives.
    - Armour, leather
    - Silver dagger
    - 1d6 assorted knives

12. Rasums
    Logical. Cold. Very quiet and fairly intimidating. Expect one-word answers.
    - Armour, leather
    - Mace (well used)
    - Garrote wire

13. Zoe
    Very into astrology. Won't take the job if they feel there isn’t 
    compatibility.
    - Armour, leather
    - Crossbow
    - Astrology chart

14. Dywana from Nowhere
    Bizzare accent and unfamiliar speech pattern that’s difficult to place.
    - Armour, leather (faded)
    - Short sword
    - 25' rope ladder

15. Wydo the Untimely
    Bad luck seems to follow them around. Good at pointing out the silver lining
    - Armour, leather
    - Shortbow
    - Hand broom

16. Pia Popkins
    Beautiful handwriting. Looking for more pen pals in distant places. 
    - Armour, leather
    - Warhammer
    - Messenger pigeon

17. Kerra Gwyn
    Pushy and foulmouthed. Prefers non-traditional and freethinking folks.
    - Armour, leather
    - Hand axe
    - Book of poetry

18. Theodora Mayhem
    Everywhere they go, people seem to know and love them. Vegetarian.
    - Armour, leather
    - Longbow
    - Flagon of berry wine

19. Mabel Rozee
    Jobs today are great “training” for a huge heist they plan in the future.
    - Armour, leather
    - Polearm
    - Stolen holy symbol

20. Scarlata Galli
    Spicy personality with admirable dedication to their craft as a sneak.
    - Armour, leather
    - Sword
    - Smoke bomb (1)




                                   {PAGE 10}

                                    CLERICS


01. Keita the Passenger
    Totally blind. “I usually just tie this rope here around someone so not to 
    get lost.”
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Whistle

02. Malina Karin
    Understands the common tongue but speaks only Gargoyle due to a curse!
    - Clothing, simple (soiled)
    - Unarmed
    - Wool blanket

03. Toly Springall
    Nothing to offer but cliches. “The early bird gets the worm!”
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Unarmed
    - A few coin clippings

04. Nero the Fickle
    Can never make up their mind. Shopping around for a new deity.
    - Clothing, colourful
    - Unarmed
    - Misc. holy symbols

05. Erard Moulin
    Withdrawn. Avoids eye contact. Mumbles under their breath. Fidgets.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Wooden beads

06. Yestin Gosling
    Yearning to take on a parental role. “Let ol’ Yestin show you how it’s
    done!”
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Staff
    - Smoked fish (for sharing)

07. Emily Noyes
    Believes art is sacred. Seeks harmony through exploration of new places.
    - Clothing, fashionable
    - Sling
    - Painting set

08. Lucious o’ the Land
    A real folksy type who will happily join up just for the company.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Club (large branch)
    - Pinecone necklace

09. Pencast Turtle
    Has a fondness for tavern drinking songs. Sings under their breath when 
    stressed.
    - Clothing, baggy robes
    - Staff
    - Turtle embossed stein

10. Berchtold Thimmel
    Honours their deity through song and dance whenever they get the chance.
    - Clothing, fine
    - Sling
    - Well-loved tambourine


                                   {PAGE 11}


11. Alpin Yarwood
    Needs a good stretch before activity but pretty spry for their age.
    - Armour, leather
    - Club
    - Checkers set

12. Druda Moon
    Skin so pale it appears almost transparent. Eyes so amber they glow.
    - Armour, leather
    - Staff
    - Moon-shaped brooch

13. Floret Clunes
    Claims to have been resurrected by their deity. Spooky goth vibe going on.
    - Armour, leather (stylish)
    - Sling
    - Spiked collar

14. Vimaro de la Rosa
    Ready to work. Give them a task or they’ll find one for themselves.
    - Armour, leather
    - Club
    - Bag of ball bearings

15. Hedram Moraine
    Grew up in the frozen north and knows a thing or two about survival.
    - Armour, leather
    - Staff
    - Big fur jacket

16. Inger the Worm
    Slippery individual who prefers not to play by the rules. Greasy.
    - Armour, leather
    - Mace
    - Mouldering playing cards

17. Shona Greenpath
    “Walk with great mother Earth and you’ll walk in peace forever.”
    - Armour, leather + shield
    - Warhammer
    - Mug made from a gourd

18. Jago Loveday
    Treats an agreed working arrangement as a sacred bond. Deadly serious.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Mace
    - Armoured gloves

19. Olwen the Considered
    Big and bold. A real charmer when required and a powerful force in battle.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Warhammer
    - Flask of holy water

20. Craigie Pollock
    Wears a necklace of garlic and a belt of onions. Won’t say why. Won’t 
    remove.
    - Armour, plate mail
    - Mace
    - Pouch of seeds




                                   {PAGE 12}

                                  MAGIC USERS

01. Morcan Gibbon
    A downright useless knucklehead. Didn't bring their spell book with them.
    - Clothing, ruined robes
    - Spell: none
    - Cookbook

02. Rudy Blackwell
    Covered in thick animal fur due to a magical experiment gone wrong.
    - Clothing, Hooded robe
    - Spell: none
    - Bag of animal tongues

03. Damya Summer
    Looking for divine meaning in everything. “It was surely fate that we met!”
    - Clothing, sparkly cape
    - Spell: Read Languages
    - Crystal ball (not magic)

04. Jordi Pole
    Quick, nimble, but a silly show-off about it. Will leap and climb 
    unnecessarily.
    - Clothing, tight fitting
    - Spell: Floating Disc
    - Bag of popcorn kernels

05. Selanda Hendy
    Speaks in hushed tones. Would like to hear a secret if you’re willing to 
    share.
    - Clothing, simple gown
    - Spell: Ventriloquism
    - Notebook of secrets

06. Ladoca Day
    Unambiguous. Views themselves as to-the-point but is actually aggressive.
    - Clothing, silk gown
    - Spell: Hold Portal
    - Lantern on a stick

07. Tegen Elkmen
    In search of controversial literature for their niche collection. Not 
    religious.
    - Clothing, Fur doublet
    - Spell: Read Languages
    - Parchment + ink pen

08. Canda Rixon
    Flying their freak flag for all to see. Wins favour with some, scrutiny from
    others.
    - Clothing, eccentric
    - Spell: Protection from Evil
    - Handbills for a cool show

09. Flamina Byrd
    Takes a spiritual approach to their magical research and practices.
    - Clothing, blue vestment
    - Spell: Read Magic
    - Tarot deck

10. Buhari the Apprentice
    A promising young student of magic. Eager to use their skills in the “real 
    world”.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Spell: Light
    - Pet rat


                                   {PAGE 13}


11. Gomez the Wall
    Short, stocky, and gruff. Big bristly beard. Often mistaken for a tall
    dwarf.
    - Clothing, wool sweater
    - Spell: Shield
    - 25' extra-thick rope

12. Ripper the Reckless
    Youthful and rebellious. Often found at the library researching dark magic.
    - Clothing, practical
    - Spell: Read Magic
    - Reading glasses

13. Alesta Sparkles
    Hot headed. A bit trigger happy. Better to have them with you than against 
    you.
    - Clothing, Shimmery gown
    - Spell: Magic Missile
    - Handful of agates

14. Rhedyn Very Bright
    Has a bit of a thing for investigating dark places. “Need a light?”
    - Clothing, yellow jumpsuit
    - Spell: Light
    - Jar of fireflies

15. Ekada Red Frog
    Raised by Halflings. Laid-back attitude, for better or worse. “What’s the
    hurry?”
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Spell: Sleep
    - Long churchwarden pipe

16. Osmer Tilman
    Beady black eyes and black hair. Never willingly removes their black gloves.

    - Clothing, jet-black robe
    - Spell: Detect Magic
    - Black newt in a box

17. Susan Quarry
    Clothing can barely contain their rippling muscles. Their neck is like a 
    foot thick.
    - Clothing, caftan
    - Spell: Shield
    - Oversized crowbar

18. Pernilla Bighouse
    Prefers working with well-mannered and intelligent adventurers. Loves to 
    chat.
    - Clothing, elaborate gown
    - Spell: Charm Person
    - Fine china tea set

19. Kew Buckler
    Highly endorsed. Their death-or-glory attitude does get them in trouble.
    - Clothing, wool trousers
    - Spell: Shield
    - Vials of Holy water (3)

20. Volkmar
    Head-to-toe covered in tattoos. Very friendly and drawn to diverse groups.
    - Clothing, sleeveless shirt 
    - Spell: Sleep
    - Crude tattooing kit




                                   {PAGE 14}

                                   HALFLINGS


01. Todo the Forgetful
    Often late. Usually distracted. “Sorry, what was your name again?”
    - Clothing, shirt inside out
    - Unarmed
    - Library book (overdue)

02. Mulcha the Gruff
    So incredibly irritable and grouchy. Never wakes up on the right side o' the 
    bed.
    - Clothing, unfashionable
    - Unarmed
    - 5 apples (wormy)

03. Bombwise Yelley
    Reluctantly adventures to feed milk habit. Most at home in open spaces.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - Bottle of fresh milk

04. Sabo Frostwillow
    Really quite chuffed to be going on their first adventure with y’all.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Unarmed
    - A dozen quail eggs

05. Guppy Phillis
    A bookish bookworm to their very core. Only taking jobs to buy more books.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Unarmed
    - Rucksack full of books

06. Togily Mosscloak
    A nature-y little character. Most likely to know the name of that bug or 
    plant.
    - Clothing, cloak (mossy)
    - Staff
    - Magnifying glass

07. Oda Ochard
    Will probably compliment you. Just kind of sweet and cute, you know?
    - Clothing, floofy
    - Club
    - Little pins they give out

08. Albo Milard
    Takes a “leisure-first” approach to life. Has a lot of hobbies. Great fun.
    - Clothing, simple (cozy)
    - Sling
    - Pouch of skipping rocks

09. Falcwin Buttersmear
    Topics of interest: Breads, meats, cheeses. “When shall we stop for a bite?”

    - Clothing, dinner jacket
    - Dagger
    - Picnic basket

10. Bardwin Leftright
    Mother was a famous cartographer. Knows mapping but prefers wine.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Staff
    - Wineskin + travel goblet


                                   {PAGE 15}


11. Keek the Potter
    Respected clayfoot guild potter. Loved by animals. Good friend. Party 
    starter.
    - Clothing, linen + shield
    - Short sword
    - Sack of potters clay

12. Wigo Fallwood
    An absolute delight to be around. Always volunteers to take the first watch.
    - Armour, leather
    - Hand axe
    - Bundle of cedar kindling

13. Fruity Pumpernickle
    Cool in the Halfling scene. In search of interesting new treasures to show 
    off.
    - Armour, leather
    - Spear
    - Stylish satchel

14. Blanca B.
    Sweet and upbeat. Whistles a merry tune while travelling overland.
    - Armour, leather
    - Short sword
    - Very wide-brimmed hat

15. Hasco Tootall
    You ain't never seen a Halfling this tall in your life. Mammoth feet, too.
    - Armour, leather (bad fit)
    - Mace
    - Pot of honey

16. Drogfast Cornbelly
    Fancies themselves a comedian. Content to be laughed with or at.
    - Armour, leather
    - Shortbow
    - 5 cheese sandwiches 

17. Everham Roastpot
    Expect a great deal of pretentious yammering about food and drink.
    - Armour, leather
    - Crossbow
    - Assorted offbeat spices

18. Gemjaw Worris
    Chooses their words carefully. Speaks in a slow, lethargic manner.
    - Armour, leather + shield
    - Sword 
    - 7 plums

19. Adelia Alabasher
    At their best cracking skulls in battle. At their worst in social 
    situations.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Warhammer
    - Spiked boots

20. Emmo Bitterbush
    A dark sense of humour appreciated by few outside dungeon-delving circles.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Battle axe
    - 10’ pole




                                   {PAGE 16}

                                    DWARVES


01. Quaid Boondie
    Young and irritating. “Dress for the job you want, not the one you have.”
    - Clothing, fake armour
    - Unarmed 
    - Homemade flag

02. ???
    Muttering and grumbling is all you hear. You can’t even understand their 
    name.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Unarmed
    - Prize-winning radish

03. Biffrom the Ancient
    Sure they’ve experienced a lot, but what have they got to show for it?
    - Clothing, old-fashioned
    - Unarmed
    - Ineffective cure-all tonic

04. Dorlif the Dark
    Short, haggard Dwarf covered head to toe in soot. Busy!
    - Clothing, simple (sooty)
    - Unarmed
    - Broom

05. Bolda Gromrok
    Would really prefer to be back in the mines digging up cool rocks and stuff.
    - Clothing, mining garb
    - Unarmed
    - Rock chisel

06. Carlos Desario
    Attempts to hide their fear of failing with lies and stories. Plays in a 
    band.
    - Clothing, middle class
    - Dagger
    - Mandolin

07. Vorva Ilmark
    Lacks focus and tends to doddle, but when inspired will give it their all.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Sling
    - Trashy fiction book

08. Youlou Gildivorm
    Dwarves this and Dwarves that. “The thing about Dwarves…” Insufferable.
    - Clothing, traditional
    - Club
    - Dwarven songbook

09. Hogshead Serlo
    On a lifelong quest to create the most unique and outstanding ales.
    - Clothing, apron
    - Staff
    - Brewer’s yeast samples

10. Sulwyn the Downy
    Is there even a Dwarf hiding behind that rug of hair and monstrous beard?
    - Clothing, filthy
    - Dagger
    - Leather headband


                                   {PAGE 17}


11. Thundor Rumrush
    A fleet-footed Dwarf with a reputation for drinking as fast as they scurry.
    - Armour, leather
    - Warhammer 
    - BIg ol’ jug of rum

12. Beeron the Graceful
    Silky smooth beard. Long eyelashes. Glowing skin. Very clean for a Dwarf.
    - Armour, Leather
    - Short sword
    - Grooming kit

13. Adroth
    “Is it ok if I bring my little cousin? I’m supposed to be watching them 
    today.”
    - Armour, leather
    - Hand axe
    - Little cousin Froburt

14. Erdle Drycreek
    Accentuated smile lines. Rosey cheeks. Appreciates the little things in 
    life.
    - Armour, leather
    - Mace
    - Blown glass beads

15. Lirly Grayfish
    Raised on a ship. Speaks with “yars” and “ayes”. Misses the sea dearly.
    - Armour, leather
    - Fishing spear
    - Wooden bucket

16. Cedar Rockmin
    Simply wishes to smash up some baddies in exchange for a bit of gold.
    - Amour, leather
    - Warhammer
    - Brass knuckles

17. Pat Holdall
    Spent a good portion of their life chaperoning folks up and down mountains.
    - Armour, leather + shield
    - Shortbow
    - Enormous backpack

18. Tonnos the Irreverent
    Non-traditional. Tends to butt heads with religious and overly optimistic 
    folks.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Crossbow
    - Pine tar

19. Lefdor the Stout
    Nearly as wide as they are tall. Solid as a rock. Not fond of running.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Battle axe
    - Cast iron stewpot

20. Rumon Dolgthorn
    Party animal with a gift for rousing even the most introverted of folks.
    - Armour, plate mail
    - Sword
    - Bottle marked “X"




                                   {PAGE 18}

                                     ELVES


01. Prince Holn
    Claims to be a royal family member but isn’t fooling anyone. Emits a foot 
    odour.
    - Clothing, soiled
    - Unarmed
    - Poorly crafted crown

02. Grifdun
    Only mildly interested in whatever you’re telling them. Generally homely.
    - Clothing, rags
    - Unarmed
    - 10 earthworms

03. Foggy Carl
    Wants to talk about how we're all like, connected… man. “Got any snacks?”
    - Clothing, poncho 
    - Unarmed
    - Pipe-weed kit

04.  Rindie Shaarimbie
    Speaks in rhyme. All of the time. Most people don't like it. Not one little 
    bit.
    - Clothing, shiny
    - Unarmed
    - Spoons (instrument)

05. Loredel from Afar
    Overweening traveller who never shuts up. “I’ve seen the world 3 times 
    over!"
    - Clothing, fine
    - Unarmed
    - Astrolabe

06. Ganoleth the Forsaken
    Shuffles along with their head held low. Unusually sour for an Elf.
    - Clothing, simple
    - Javelin
    - Large iron spike

07. Fareswen
    Owes a great debt to a spirit of the woods. Competent but jumpy.
    - Clothing, hunting garb
    - Club
    - Bow saw

08. Nim Solaris
    A gifted dancer who never quite made it. Can still totally bust a move.
    - Clothing, dance outfit
    - Dagger
    - Music box

09. Tree
    Soft-spoken and calm. Respectful of woodland creatures and native plants.
    - Clothing, homemade
    - Sling
    - Collection of acorns

10. Elros Nando
    Prepare to make an enemy for life if you interfere with what they believe is
    right.
    - Armour, leather
    - Dagger
    - 1 ring for each finger


                                   {PAGE 19}


11. Anthoniel of Cascade
    Dreams of building a secret stronghold behind a rushing waterfall.
    - Clothing, restrained
    - Spear / Ventriloquism
    - Fishing rod

12. Belebris Propert
    Venturesome young Elf looking to expand their horizons and see the world. 
    - Armour, leather
    - Mace / Protection fr. Evil 
    - Fine spyglass

13. Erlamel
    Extremely vain and showy. Expect dive-rolls into rooms and axe spinning.
    - Armour, leather
    - Hand axe / Floating Disc
    - Hand mirror

14. Finevrond the Fine
    Positive attitude and absolutely up for a new challenge any day.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Shortbow / Light
    - Fishing net

15.  Beryn the Supercilious
    Walks about with their nose held high. A jerk that no one (including Elves) 
    likes.
    - Armour, leather
    - Short sword / Hold Portal 
    - Ear polish

16. Three Drink Julie
    You’ll likely find them lurking in the corner of a pub with 3 different 
    drinks.
    - Armour, leather
    - Crossbow / Detect Magic
    - Bag of hair

17. Ilmriel Shim
    A recluse who just decided to reconnect with the world at large. A bit 
    awkward.
    - Armour, leather + shield
    - Longbow / Magic Missile
    - Delicious mushrooms

18. Meltiss Ther
    Will take a job with any party but only speaks Elvish. Gentle eyes.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Sword / Charm Person
    - Pouch of dried berries

19. Faerwë Welle
    Mighty high spirits even in the worst of times. Taking on jobs for the fun 
    of it.
    - Armour, chainmail
    - Polearm / Sleep
    - Triangle (instrument)

20. Olwen Kitur
    The oldest Elf you’ve ever met. Appears to be taking jobs out of utter 
    boredom
    - Armour, Plate mail
    - Battle axe / Light
    - Awesome war helmet




                                   {PAGE 20}

                             HIRING POOL PROCEDURE


HIRING POOL

This procedure generates a pool of retainers for players to choose from. If play
ers are at the table, consider letting them do the rolling. It's fun!

    1. How many retainers are for hire?
       Roll 1d6. This is the number of retainers interested in the job the party
       is advertising. 
       Example: 3 = 3 retainers are interested & available for hire.

    2. What types of retainers are for hire?
       The variety and calibre of retainers can be adjusted by the dice rolled 
       in the next step.

       1d20    All races and classes  
       2d8     All humans with and without magic abilities
       1d12    All humans without magic abilities  
       1d10    Level 0 humans and fighters  
       1d8     Level 0 humans only

    3. Which specific retainers are for hire?
       For each interested retainer:
       1. Roll on the table using the dice chosen above
       2. Flip to the associated page (e.g., 11 = page 8)
       3. Roll 1d20 to determine exact retainer (e.g., 7 = #7)

       CLASS               | DICE RESULT | PAGE
       --------------------|-------------|------
       Lackeys             | 1-2         | 1    
       Townsfolk, Common   | 3-6         | 2    
       Townsfolk, Uncommon | 7-8         | 4    
       Fighters            | 9-10        | 6    
       Thieves             | 11-12       | 8    
       Clerics             | 13-14       | 10   
       Magic-Users         | 15-16       | 12   
       Halflings           | 17-18       | 14   
       Dwarves             | 19          | 16   
       Elves               | 20          | 18   

Option:
Allow players to increase how many retainers are for hire with gold. E.g., 
100gp to roll 2d6 and take the highest number, or increase the dice size to 1d8 
or 1d10.

Option:
Allow each player to hire one lackey in addition to hiring other characters that
answer their advertisement.

Option:
Allow players to use their Charisma scores to increase (or decrease) their 
hiring luck. Add NPC reactions bonus to rolls.




                                   {PAGE 21}

                   QUICK HIRING & LOCATION HIRING PROCEDURES


QUICK HIRING

This procedure abstracts the hiring process to quickly find one retainer for a p
layer. Setting a flat rate (e.g., 50gp) to roll for each retainer is 
recommended. If you're comfortable, let players run through this themselves.
    
    1. Roll 1d20 — go to that page
       Rolling 20 means the player chooses any page.

    2. Roll 1d10 — this is who you can hire
       Example: 8 = the 8th retainer on the page (#8 or #18)

Option:
Reduce the variety and calibre of retainers by using smaller dice as noted in 
the Hiring Pool procedure on page 20.

Option:
Add NPC Reaction bonuses (CHA) to the initial dice roll.

Option:
Charisma scores influence the variety and calibre of retainers available to the 
PC. Roll the following dice in step 1 based on your character’s Charisma score:

    1d20    CHA 18+
    2d8     CHA 16-17
    1d12    CHA 13-15
    1d10    CHA 6-8
    1d8     CHA 5 and less


LOCATION BASED HRING

Assign pages of this zine to locations in your game world. 

Example:
The best Fighters for hire can be found hanging around the king's fighting 
arena. Allow players to roll 1d10 on page 7 if they ask around in the area.

Example:
Elves don't hang out in town. Adventurers can only hire from pages 18-19 if they
go advertising their job in the woodland region 20 miles west of town.

Hiring locations featured on the back cover illustration

                                                
A.  Breath of Spring Spa - Elves                Page 18
B.  Teddy's Tea House - Halflings               Page 14
C.  The Sculpture Garden - Clerics              Page 10
D.  Bruno's Gymnasium - Fighters                Page  6
E.  The Crooked Shelf - Magic-Users             Page 12
F.  Pig & Grapes Tavern - Townsfolk, Uncommon   Page  4
G.  Town Square - Townsfolk, Common             Page  2
H.  Dead Loss Lane - Lackeys                    Page  1
I.  The Nimble Feather - Thieves                Page  8
J.  Dwarven Camp - Dwarves                      Page 16
