[[Symbaroum Treasure MOC]]

[[Karvosti.pdf]]p40

The reason for Karlaban's transformation into an abomination was his inability to curb his curiosity. At the top of the first High Chieftain’s residence – the tower which was later built into the stronghold and now looms at the back of the Great Throne – is a chest, the content of which was lost in legend. Like his successors, all Karlaban knew was that the chest must never be opened; that it contained an artifact of immense power, which must be guarded and kept hidden at all costs. Karlaban, who was under constant attack by the Saars and the third incarnation of the Blood-Daughter, concluded that the warnings surrounding the chest were false and that the artifact inside could be used to defend the cliff. He was mistaken...

Inside the chest lies one of the world’s most powerful sources of corruption: a seed capsule, dark as night, given to High Chieftain Agadan by Lord Eneáno during the meeting which would give birth to the Iron Pact – a symbol for humanity and elven-kind's shared responsibility in watching over Davokar. The chest was shielded by mystical runes and harmonies sung to repel corruption, and luckily the lid quickly slammed shut; Karlaban had barely opened it before Wratha’s fury swept over him. While this did not save him, the rest of Karvosti’s residents were spared the capsule’s darkness.

Another interesting detail is that Karvosti was saved, indirectly, by Aloéna’s intervention. She granted the Huldra access to a transformation ritual known as [[Symbaroum Ritual Catching Fire]]; the Huldra and her Keepers tracked down a young Karit woman who was prepared to give her life for the High Chieftain’s people. The ritual was performed successfully, and raging flames flowed through the woman, giving her enough strength and protection to defeat the blight-born Karlaban. But in the end, she was doomed to die by her own flames. It took almost an entire day for the fire to consume her, and the woman spent much of it screaming in agony before she finally crumbled into ashes.